I think it had a lot to do with the faculty. And we had
a great faculty relationship. I was never denied
any sort of advising that I felt that I needed. I was
guided quite well. Now, too, you've got to add to
that the question even with the tremendous growth
that the university population experienced
during that time. Needless to say, the faculty
pace could not keep up with it in terms of
student-teacher ratio. But most of the colleges,
some better than others, did a great job of making
it work anyway. And there was, I mean, I don't know
of a time that I needed to either go see a professor
in one of my classes, or excuse me, I cannot
remember a time that I needed to go to see one of my
professors or to see my academic advisor or to see a
dean or an associate dean even before I became
student body president that I was ever denied. And
it just wasn't a problem. Now my perception was
that A&M was working then to be inclusive not to
divide up into special categories. Like I've said
to people, and tell me if you agree or disagree,
I've said to people, the real important thing was
not what someone's ancestry was, but were you a
part of A&M?
I had the impression that Jewish kids, Hispanic
kids, Lebanese kids, in terms of parentage, all
felt part of the group. I'll
say yes and no. And the reason I'll say yes and no is
sort of the fog. You'll have to reel back, I think,
about 8 to 10 years before 1976. And so let's talk
about when I may be 10 years, maybe less than that,
about 68, that time frame. Texas had just gone
through, during that time frame, from 65 to 70. and
even as late as 71 in some instances, forced
desegregation.
And particularly in towns where there were large
minority populations, and that generally is the
case as it remains today, sort of like east of
Interstate 35,
you had had some changes that had taken place. And
so these are the kinds of kids, now that you've got
at the university environment,
I've always made an argument that supported the
argument that
kids were ready to make the join the, uh, maybe not
some of the parents. And so these are the type of
kids that you end up having, but they're mixed in
with kids from the other part of the state. The
western half of the state where mixed race
populations are not as great. You've got these
sort of new experiences going on.
Notwithstanding the collectivism that took
place as a result of the Civil Rights Movement, by
the time you got to about 74, 75,
there was a change, in my view, on the part of that
population that was beginning to move back into a
separatist, separateness,
looking for an identity, if you will. And so when
you got, you know, everybody who was just amongst
blacks, for example, there was this thing called
the Black Awareness Committee. The primary
purpose of the Black Awareness Committee was for
the purpose of bringing maybe once a year,
somebody who was a prominent black political
leader or writer or author or whatever to campus
for an event. But the Black Awareness Committee
also became a social
organization. It also became an activist
organization. in the sense of if there were issues
that the Black Awareness Committee thought
needed to be brought to the attention of the
administration, that a lot of these ideas, if any,
flowed from that group.
And it wasn't necessarily, I'm trying to think of
some issues, but it wasn't necessarily because
people had been denied things. or that people
thought that they were
being discriminated against. It was more along
the lines of, you know, we need to have more
opportunities to do this, so help us do that. And so
that sort of became, that was sort of the
beginning, I think, of sort of the move back to
divisiveness. It wasn't necessarily promoted by
the university, but it was more promoted by what I
saw happening sociologically during that time
frame. Well, I think we have it now, today. I think a
great deal of it today. And it's sort of matured in
the 80s. And so, what had been a forced, what had
started out as we've been discriminated against,
separate but equal, doesn't work, and all that
kind of stuff. And the courts say, okay, we're
gonna force you to be equal and we're gonna lump you
all together. and everybody's going to get along,
and everybody's going to figure out whose badges
they're going to use, and all this kind of stuff.
When we start getting toward the mid-'70s and
late-'70s, the war was over. So the draft was gone.
So these other types of things that generally can
sap the emotions and the thought processes of
people. That distraction wasn't there anymore.
And so I think that that was, even at conservative
Texas A&M, that that was what was developing
during that time. Did any of the other minority
students, be they black, Hispanic, or otherwise,
did any of them ever come and fuss at you for not
doing something they wanted done? I don't
remember that happening at all. Good. I got fussed
at for other things. Let's see. I was taken before
the judicial board while I was student body
president. For? Failure to implement a piece of
legislation that the previous student senate had
enacted. The previous student senate had enacted
because of the guy who'd been... academic affairs
vice president, a piece of legislation which
required that students be given the opportunity
to vote confidence or no confidence in members of
the faculty. And that this was to be published by
student government for the purpose of students
being able to decide with more scientifically
gathered information, of course, the quality of
the professors as they chose courses. I was
supposed to have done this. The way the
legislation was written, it was written such that
it had to be done during the fall semester of the
particular academic year. And we still going? Of
the particular academic year. You know, on Monday
I started classes, so it was. So you enrolled the
second? Second summer session. Second summer
session. So I'd already been a fish by the time fish
camp came around. Did you and your buddy, freshman
buddies, did you all start using Aggie slang
quickly? Were you fish?
No, not really. As I think back to those days, a lot
of that had to do with the fact that Number one, I
wasn't in the core. And the core during that time
frame really had more of the slang associated with
being a fish and all that kind of stuff than did the
non-rec population on campus.
For example, now the freshmen who are chosen in
student government to be aides, if you will,
during their first year on campus are called fish
aides. Back in 1973, that wasn't the case. So more
of the fish aspect and other Aggie slang was more
associated with being in the Corps of Cadets than
it was otherwise. on campus. Let's jump now to
September. And you're taking a full load, I
presume. Describe a typical freshman academic
day. It began when? Oh, I generally loaded it on
pretty well, because what I was trying to do was,
after having taken a year off, it was my goal and
objective to
complete my undergraduate degree pretty close to
as well I could those who would have normally
started with me in the fall of 1972 had I not done the
FFA thing. So I probably was taking 16 to 18 hours
and, you know, again, the beginning of the day and
worked my way through the end of the day. One of One
of the anecdotes that I was going to mention, I
distinctly remember, in fact, that's about the
only course I remember from my freshman year. No,
that's not true. I do remember this one. There was a
new guy on campus in the chemistry department at
that period in time who was teaching freshman
chemistry named Rod O'Connor. And Rod had
written, that was during the time frame that
Program learning was sort of like a new thing, at
least at the secondary school level. And Rod
decided that he was going to write a freshman
chemistry text that was based on a programmed
learning concept, which basically is you sort of
like take chapters of stuff and have self-tests
associated with each chapter and the sort of
building process that goes on in the program
learning aspect of it. And Rod had written this
chemistry book. And actually, I remember it quite
well because it had been typed and had been reduced
in size to the size of a book and had been bound. And
that was a textbook that we used. It was over in the
old chemistry building. There were, I guess, a
couple of hundred of us and freshmen in the class
taking the introductory chemistry course. And I
remember distinctly going into the room that fall
and probably 10 at the most of the 200 or so students
had calculators. And of course, there are a lot of
numbers associated with the way Rod had designed
this freshman course. And there were about, oh, I
guess, 80% of us who either had access to or knew how
to use a slide rule. So Rod, in an effort to sort of
have fairness, wouldn't let the guys using the
calculators use their calculators in class But he
got graduate assistants to do special tutoring
sessions to teach us, those who did not know how to
use a slide rule, how to use a slide rule so that they
could compete effectively and learn in a
classroom environment. That's one of the
interesting experiences about my first year
there. I can understand Rod making the decision
not to, allow the four or five kids or 10 kids who had
calculators to use them. Uh, but for him to take the
added step of, of going the extra mile to teach
those kids who did not have knowledge of the slide
rule use so that they could could compete
effectively and learn in the, in that, in that
learning environment, uh, I think is a great
attestation to the nature of the relationships
that existed during that time. between faculty
and students. At the time, the university
probably was about the size, oh, about 14,000
kids, roughly. And even then, we still had some
large classes, particularly in basic chemistry
and some of the other courses that we took, history
classes, for example. But that extra effort, I
think, on Ron's part was indicative of the
pretty much across the board attitude of faculty
in terms of their relationship with students and
that I think is a great compliment and that is
something that I hope will never be lost in the
learning environment at Texas A&M. One year later
ironically that year still sort of broken up for me
because in October I was elected national FFA
secretary and dropped out of school. So at the end
of your first semester? Not even at the end, I
dropped out mid-semester. Oh, okay. I dropped out
mid-semester, so now I've only had like one summer
session under my belt and about six weeks of
undergraduate, I mean of what would have been the
start of my, or continuation of my freshman year,
whichever, but my first full-time load, if you
will. And I took incompletes in all of my courses
and traveled around the country for a year as
National FFA Secretary. I re-enrolled at Texas
A&M in the fall of 1974, and
now with a big whopping one summer session under my
belt and two years behind my classmates from high
school years, And re-enrolled, fortunately, in
the classes worked in each of the classes that I had
taken incompletes in the year before. And I want to
reel forward to that chemistry class again
because when I arrived in the chemistry class the
fall of 1974 to finally hopefully complete
chemistry 101, 95% of the kids in the class had
calculators and probably 5% of them We're still
using the slide room, which I think is a tremendous
example of the advent of technology in one short
year. And it's a very vivid reminder to me of how
quickly things can change, particularly now. You
get a free calculator that's solar powered for
doing a subscription to a magazine. And so that was
finally, I got re-enrolled in the school at Texas
A&M in the fall of 74. At
that time I also came back and changed my major, or
at least I did at the end of that first semester of
1974 when I was in biochemistry and changed my
major to agricultural economics. What led you to
make that change? I made the decision that
throughout the course of that year that I served as
Well, one could make the argument that calculus
and the perspective of doing organic chemistry
was what made me make that change. That was not. But
what I decided over the course of the year while I
was serving as National FFA Secretary was that I
did not want to be a biochemist because of the
options that it provided for me. I was either going
to teach, which I didn't think was something that I
wanted to do, or I would be engaged in some really
neat, pure scientific research, which I decided
wasn't my cup of tea. And I ultimately decided I did
not want to be a physician. But I decided that
perhaps a better role for me, knowing myself a
little bit better at that time, would be one which
allowed me to have more interaction with people,
but in a verbal sort of a sense. And I got this idea
that I might want to go to law school. And so the
course of instruction that I chose was economics
because I had gotten a tremendous amount of
exposure to the agribusiness world while I was
serving as national secretary. And so I made the
swap. Was there an academic advisor or advisors at
A&M that helped you? Well, Dr. Brown was sort of my
buddy during that time frame, needs to say,
because of our relationship that we had developed
going back to my early FFA days, when I was in high
school, actually. That sort of shifted when I made
the transition to Ag Eco to Dr. J.C. Grady, who was
my undergraduate advisor, if you will, for the
remainder of my academic time at A&M. Also in that
bunch was, and this was sort of because of a job that
I had, I was a student worker in the early, very
earliest days of the, what is now known as the real
estate center, which was then the Texas real
estate research center, which had sort of been a
collaboration created primarily by the
professors in the economics department who were
making a transition from sort of the rural side of
the program to more of the, um, uh, urban side of,
of, of real estate and real estate development.
And, uh, A former head of the Department of Ag
Economics, Dr. Pat Rudin, A.B. Pat Rudin, was the
first director of the Real Estate Center. One of
the other professors who was doing double duty
with the Extension Service, or I guess triple
duty, the Extension Service, the Research
Center, and also in the Department of Agriculture
and Economics was a guy named Don Levi. And Don is a
lawyer, had written an agricultural law text. And
since I'd kind of gotten into this thought that I
might want to be a lawyer, Don and JC Grady were sort
of my mentors, if you will, in terms of the guidance
that they gave me during my time at A&M. And then
there was this associate dean over at the College
of Agriculture named R.C. Potts who sort of
overrode it all. Because I had the impression Dean
Potts had a special role in a lot of students. He
did. He did. He did. And I'll tell a story about that
later. I'm gathering that because you did not
start out as a freshman three months out of high
school, that being a part of a certain class didn't
matter like it would have if you'd been over in the
Corps. That was one of the reasons, in fact, that I
chose not to be in the Corps.
In fact, that's probably the only reason that I
chose not to be in the Corps. I felt very strongly
then, and I do to this day, that the leadership
laboratory created by the Corps of Cadets at Texas
A&M University is one which is predicated upon a
group of people moving together through similar
experiences, even though They may be in different
undergraduate curriculum. Nonetheless, the
movement together and the camaraderie that is
developed during that leadership experience is
vital for the Corps of Cadets' continued vitality
as a part of Texas A&M University. I couldn't get
that. I couldn't get that because I was trying to
catch up with my buddies who were my age, if you
will. And trying to frog into the Corps as a junior
was not going to cut it. And so as a result, I opted
not to be in the Corps of Cadets. But as I kidded all
of my colleagues later when I became student body
president, I was nonetheless commander in chief,
which included the Corps of Cadets. OK, who were
the advisors, teachers, et cetera, that helped to
get you involved in A&M leadership experiences?
Well, actually, there weren't any folks involved
in that. It was sort of like,
I guess, what one would consider sort of expected
of me, and I sort of expected it of myself. And so it
was really sort of weird because, let me see how I
describe this, if I can get these dates and times
right. In the fall of 1973,
we had freshman senator elections. And I chose to
run for freshman College of Agriculture senator.
But it was basically amongst the folks in the class
of 1977 as opposed to 76 because I had been out for a
year. And I didn't really need a whole lot of
encouragement in that regard. And secondly, I had
a pretty good likely voter base in my favor because
of the decision as to who is freshman agriculture
senator is made by freshman College of
Agriculture majors, many of whom I had known for
four or five years because of my involvement in
FFA. So it was sort of a pretty easy choice.
Ironically, though, I had to relinquish that
position six weeks later, or three weeks later,
whatever it was, when I dropped out of school. When
I came back to school in the fall of 1974,
In the spring of 1975, when normal student body
elections were held, I ran for, it was really sort
of hard to figure out which one I was supposed to run
for because my hours were really sort of screwed
up, and I ran for College of Agriculture. What did I
have? I think I had enough hours to be a sophomore.
So I think it was sophomore. In the spring of 75, and
I was elected from the College of Agriculture. Did
you campaign? Not really. You didn't go around and
shake hands? No, I didn't go around and shake
hands. I didn't do any of those things. It was sort
of like go to a couple of the College of Agriculture
meetings like the Collegiate FFA or the Animal
Science, I mean the Saddle and Sirloin Bunch or
whatever. But basically I had a lot of friends
spreading the word. We put up some flyers and, you
know, that's sort of it. So I was elected in the
spring to be a member of, the Senate from the
College of Agriculture and at the end of that
spring of 75 that new group elects officers for the
following year within or at the time within the
Senate and I ran for Speaker of the Student Senate
and was elected Speaker in 75. So that would be for
your Junior year. Basically. It really never got
straight because that was, I guess I served as
speaker during the fall of 1975 in the academic
year of 75, 76. And it was at the end of or in the
spring of 1976 that I ran for student body
president and was elected in April of that year.
And I served as student body president the 76-77
academic year, but I actually graduated and
received my undergraduate degree in December of
1976. Now that's another one too, but this is
another Dr. Potts story. It was sort of like,
during that time, and I'll just spring back and
forth on these and we can clean them up later, but
during that time, graduating seniors did not have
to take finals. assuming you were passing at that
time. And so you basically finished your last
round of quizzes like in November around about
Thanksgiving. And so I was kind of done and having a
great time hanging out at College Station,
bothering all of my friends and keeping them from
studying those who were not graduating in
December. And during, let's see, that year I was
also serving as chairman of the sportsmanship
committee for the Southwest Conference Athletic
Association. The guy who was then Corps commander
who actually succeeded me as student body
president was a guy named Robert Harvey. And Bob
and I sort of became good friends because I made a
concerted effort during my tenure as student body
president to reach out to the Corps, again going
back to those things I said earlier about the
vibrancy of the university and its heart and soul
and how the Corps of Cadets provides a tremendous
boost in that regard. And I had to come present the
sportsmanship committee here at the Cotton Bowl.
Yet A&M was playing Florida in the Sun Bowl. And so
Bob and I came up here first, kind of did the thing at
the Cotton Bowl, and then we went out to El Paso, did
the Sun Bowl, and went back to a basketball game at
College Station, ironically. So we made a big old
tour of Texas. But sometime during that time
frame, and it's like, I guess because of the energy
crisis, school was starting later. I believe we
had taken a longer break for Christmas, New Year's
recess. And I'm kind of like hanging out finally
and getting ready to come back down here. And I get
this phone call from Dr. Potts. And it's like out of
clear blue, we're doing the holidays. And I said,
Dr. Potts, how you doing? Blah, blah, blah. Have a
good holiday. Get through all of the
pleasantries. And he says, Fred, do you enjoy
being student vice president? And I said, I love
it, Dr. Potts, you know, it's going to come to an end
here in the spring, but yeah, I love it. He goes,
well, do you realize that to be student body
president, you have to be enrolled as a student?
And I said, yeah. He goes, well, didn't you just
graduate in December? Well, yeah, I did. He says,
well, like, how are you going to be a student in the
spring? You know, so like, oh. So as a result, I was
immediately enrolled into college. the graduate
program in agricultural economics, seeking an MS
degree so that I could be a student while I finished
my term as student vice president. Thanks to Dr.
Potts, I didn't get sort of removed from office for
lack of being a student. So again, one of the great,
unique, wonderful things about the
relationships between students and professors
going up to the dean's office and, of course,
ultimately into the administration, higher vice
presidents and presidents. Were it not for that
kind of attention that was paid to all students,
not just those of us who happen to be involved in
leadership positions within the student
government or whatever, or on campus in other
student leadership roles, that thing is that
which is most unique. And now I'm talking about a
time frame when our university had been the
fastest growing state public institution in the
country for the previous two years and what had
been 14,000 students that I mentioned earlier was
now 28,000 students. But that personal
relationship stuff continued and that's very
unique and very special. Why do you think it was
growing so fast right then? I think it was growing
quickly then for Oh, I think the primary reason was
that all of a sudden, uh, Texas A&M, uh, did not have
as much of an agrarian, uh, image. And that image
was changing. Frankly, I'd seen that changing
though, even going back to my days in FFA, you know,
at the time that I was national FFA secretary, the
largest FFA chapter in the country. was in
downtown Los Angeles. It was horticulture
programs, except these guys not only had
horticulture, but they also had an acre where they
raised cattle in downtown, which is the most
unusual experience. But there was a huge shift
going on in the agribusiness side. Of course, the
College of Agriculture was still, along with the
College of Engineering, sort of the largest two
colleges within the university during that time
frame. And as the ag programs began to shift, What
happened was that I think
the image that A&M had previously had, which was
like all corps and all military and straight, pure
agriculture, farm boys and girls, was changing.
In addition, females started coming to school.
And that was the other factor. I may be going out on a
limb, but I am going to guess that Probably during
my last year, and of course these numbers can be
found, but I'm going to say, you know, we
didn't have just a whole lot of females at college
even in 1976. See, Williams made the board agree
before he accepted the job that he could take an
existing dormitory And on January 1, 1971,